Your custom views and your custom
controls fully keyboard navigable
is very important to accessibility.
Someone who's unable to use the mouse
needs to use a keyboard to get around.
It's very,
very important that they're able
to do things with a keyboard.
So for custom views and controls,
you want to implement
full keyboard navigation.
And then the other thing to think about
as you're designing the user interface
of your application is you don't want
to have things that require a mouse,
and the mouse is the only
way to get things done.
And kind of the canonical example
there is in the Finder for many years,
the only way to copy or remove a file was
to drag it from one location to another,
which, if you can't use a mouse to drag,
that's very, very difficult.
That's impossible.
So by adding copy and paste
menu items that can be gotten
to through keyboard navigation,
the Finder is now much more accessible
when it comes to manipulating files.
So in your applications,
those are things to think about.
We're not going to focus a great
deal on that anymore in this session,
but I do want to emphasize
that this is a very,
very important point before we go on.
Now, most of the time when you hear about
making your application accessible,
it's talking about how your application
interacts with assistive applications.
And we're going to define
that term in just a moment.
That's really the bulk,
that's the crux of what
we're talking about today.
So let's jump in and talk
about that a little bit more.
So we have some applications
running on our system.
We have Finder, it's a Carbon app.
We got a Cocoa app like iChat.
We have your Cocoa application running.
And they're all running
as applications do.
They're drawing to the screen.
They're handling mouse events.
They're handling key events.
They're all happy.
They're in their little snug,
protected memory space chugging along.
And then somebody launches
an assistive application,
in this case, VoiceOver,
the screen reader on Mac OS X.
An assistive application at a high
level is an application that interacts
with other applications on the system
and can provide an alternate way
for a user to interact with all the
other applications on the system.
The more nuts and bolts definition
is that it's an application that
is using a set of APIs called
the Accessibility APIs.
We're not concerned with those
APIs because we're not writing
an assistive application,
but it's important to know who's
going to be asking you questions
and interacting with your app.
They're a set of C APIs.
They start with the AX prefix.
If you search in the developer
docs for accessibility,
you're going to find them.
They're parts of the API that
you don't have to worry about.
Now, using those APIs,
and they're public APIs so anyone
can write an assistive application,
using InterProcess Communication,
it's going to be able to talk to all the
other applications running on the system.
And all those other apps
are going to respond back.
And so this is kind of a line of
communications that's beyond the
one that we usually think about
when we think about an application
being interacted with by a user.
It's another way for somebody to
interact with your application.
Now, how is it that my application
is able to do this?
I didn't do any accessibility
work whatsoever.
Well,
both Carbon and Cocoa frameworks have
baked into them the infrastructure
to be able to listen for this
communication from assistive
applications and respond back.
Now,
We often will call these other
applications on the system that
can interact with an assistive app,
you'll hear them call things
like an Accessible Application or
an Accessorized Application.
So, I wanted to get those terms straight
because it's important to know what
side of the communication you're on.
And we, in this session,
are talking about your application
as kind of the thing listening
for and responding to queries
from assistive applications.
Now, there can be many,
many assistive applications.
What I'd like to do is - some of
you may not have seen VoiceOver in
action - is bring up Rick Fabrick.
He's a senior engineer on VoiceOver.
To give you a brief demo of VoiceOver and
also to talk about some of the new
features that are coming out of it.
Thanks, James.
Good afternoon everybody,
my name is Rick Fabrick.
I am an engineer on the VoiceOver team.
And what I'm going to be doing for the
next 5 or 10 minutes is two things.
I'm going to be going over some
of the basics of VoiceOver,
and then I am going to go and
demo some of the new features
we plan on having in Leopard.
So VoiceOver.
VoiceOver is an assistive application.
In this case, it comes built in to the
operating system Mac OS X.
It is a screen reader,
so it allows users to interact
with their computer without
requiring a mouse or a display.
So the base system for a
VoiceOver user is the CPU,
or the computer, and the keyboard.
So let me turn VoiceOver on.
As James may have mentioned,
one way to turn it on is to
go to the System Preferences.
Can we have the other machine up?
And in the System Preferences
that will be appearing very soon,
there we go, thank you.
You go to the Universal Access pane,
and the top left you
press the On radio button.
Welcome to Macintosh.
VoiceOver is running.
System Preferences, Window,
Universal Access back button.
Now, when VoiceOver first launches,
it gives you some information
about the state of the machine,
which application is front most,
what window you're in, things like that.
When we first started
designing VoiceOver,
one of the main things we wanted
to do was make sure that if a
VoiceOver user was working with
somebody else at the computer,
they were collaborating,
that they could understand what
each other was doing very easily.
So VoiceOver offers some cues,
some visual and audio cues,
to help that along.
Now, one of our visual cues is what
we call the VoiceOver cursor.
And what that does is it focuses
on the element that the user is
currently "looking at." And it's the
element that they can interact with.
So, let's say I'm using VoiceOver.
Now, one of the features that
VoiceOver provides is in a way to
increase the size of the cursor.
So,
now this is useful for the VoiceOver user
if they do have some vision,
but it's limited.
But it also helps with collaboration.
So, what I'm going to do is I'm going
to send a command to VoiceOver,
and I do that with the
control and option keys down.
With those two keys down,
any other keyboard sends
a command to VoiceOver.
So, VoiceOver 3, 4, 6.
You may be able to see in the top left,
the VoiceOver cursor.
And the VoiceOver cursor is quite large.
It's those black rectangle
around the element.
Okay, so now with VoiceOver,
the control and option keys down,
and the arrow keys,
I can move the VoiceOver cursor
to see what is in the window.
So I can tell what I can do.
Let me move the cursor over.
Forward.
Dim button.
Show all button.
And as the cursor moves
from element to element,
VoiceOver describes the element
so I know what I can do.
So in this case,
I'm on the Show All button.
And with VoiceOver,
I can press that button.
Press Show All button.
And I can now move the cursor to
the computer without using a mouse.
Let me bring the VoiceOver cursor
back down to normal size.
VoiceOver 4, 3, 2, 1, 1.
Now, as a developer,
you should be looking at one of
the features that is in Tiger,
and that is the screen curtain.
What that does is it dims the screen
so that you get a better sense
of how VoiceOver users will be
interacting with your applications.
Let me turn that on just so you can see.
Screen curtain on.
And now I can use
VoiceOver normally by navigating.
Forward.
Dim button.
Back button.
And this is a tool you can use to
possibly find areas in your application
that may need more accessibility work.
So let me turn the screen curtain off.
Screen curtain off.
Okay.
Hide system preferences.
Finder.
Leopard selected.
So let me go into a couple of
the features that we're going
to be having for Leopard.
The first one deals with - let's see.
System terminal preview.
Preview window.
The VoiceOver commands themselves.
So another thing when we were
designing VoiceOver that we wanted to
make sure was very easy is once the
user learned how to use VoiceOver,
the user learned where the commands were,
that they can go to any Mac OS system
running Tiger Relator and be
able to use it using VoiceOver.
And whether that's in the
library or a school setting.
So - and that's going to be
true for Leopard as well.
So we're not going to be
touching the main keyboard.
But what we'd like to do in
Leopard is take advantage of the
numeric keypad on the right-hand
side of an extended keyboard.
What we're going to do is allow
the user to program their most
used VoiceOver commands to the
keys over on the right-hand side.
And we're also not going to require
the control or the option key.
The option key is to be pressed.
So you can do pretty much
anything you want to do with
VoiceOver using one hand very quickly.
What's nice about this is all
the keys are very localized,
so you don't have to
be moving around a lot.
So I can - Next.
Dint.
Button.
Zoom out.
Zoom in.
Button.
Navigate the VoiceOver cursor.
If I move my finger down just
slightly to another key on
the numeric keypad - Press.
Zoom.
Press.
Zoom in.
Button.
I can interact with the button.
So I can pretty much do anything
I want and program it to the
way that I use my computer.
Okay.
So that's the first feature.
The second feature deals with navigation.
High preview.
Finder.
Leopard selected.
Okay.
In Tiger,
I can navigate the VoiceOver cursor up,
down, left, right,
to the first visible element,
to the last element in the window.
In Leopard,
what we want to do is make navigation
quicker and allow you to jump to just the
types of elements that you want to go to.
Let's say you're just interested in
the images in the page or the window.
You can jump from image to image.
The same thing for links.
Also, text attributes like bold.
You can jump from one bold
block of text to another,
italic, things like that.
So let me demo that with
a text edit document.
Preview.
System terminal.
Text edit.
Window.
Okay, so here I have a document,
and let's say that I want to read all of
the text in the document that is bold.
So with one key combination,
I can... Accessibility.
A new voice.
Built for Braille.
Closed captioning.
Jump from section to section.
So in this document,
each section is titled
with some bold text,
and I can quickly jump from
section to section in this
document with the bold command.
Italics command,
so I can jump to the next
block of text that is italics.
All features referenced in
the Mac OS X Leopard sneak
peek are subject to change.
In this case,
it's at the very end of the document,
so I jump down.
I can also jump...navigate
backwards to graphics.
Embedded GIF file.
Embedded PNG file.
So this should make navigating
to just the things you want
to see in the window very,
very easy.
Alright, so the last feature that I want
to demo... Hide text edit.
Finder.
Leopard.
Selected.
Can be demoed in Terminal.
Text edit.
Preview.
System preferences.
Terminal.
Alright, so in Terminal,
if I'm doing some...
Command line commands,
and I hit return,
the command may print out some output.
A VoiceOver user in Tiger had
to navigate explicitly back
to see what just came out.
In Leopard, that's not going to be true.
If I type ls return...
Desktop music sites,
documents, pictures, our library,
public movies, send registration,
HW0014511426IF, Apple.
Okay.
So... VoiceOver will automatically
speak out whatever just came out.
So you don't have to go
back and forth and find out.
That's been a feature that was
greatly requested in Tiger.
And not only in Terminal is that useful,
but in Console and it's
very useful in iChat.
So if you're chatting with a buddy
and somebody sends you a new message,
you don't have to go back
and forth or go back and say,
"What did they just say?" We'll
automatically speak it for you.
Okay, so that's all the time
I have today for features.
What I'd like to do is ask James to come
back up so he can explain to you how
you can accessorize your application
so that VoiceOver users can take
advantage of all of your cool features.
Thanks.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Rick.
All right, so we'll go back to our
little diagram here.
So you just saw
VoiceOver interacting with lots of
other applications on the system.
It's an example of an
assistive application.
It's not the only.
In fact,
those other Apple technologies that
I mentioned - Apple X-Ray Master Track,
the Watch Me Do feature in Automator -
and anything that's getting accessibility
information is using those APIs.
So we've talked a little bit
about that communication,
but not so much about what kind
of information is coming back and
forth and what form does it take.
So let's dive in a little bit deeper.
Let's simplify our diagram to
just one assistive application
and a Cocoa application.
And using those AX APIs,
an assistive application basically gets a
process ID and passes it into those APIs,
and it gets back a little lightweight.
UI Element,
or more formally an AX UI Element ref.
This is just a little
lightweight thing that
represents a UI element.
In fact, this first one that comes back
represents the application on the
other end of this communication here.
We don't package up
NS applications and NS views and
send them to other processes.
That would be way too heavyweight.
And we also don't want assistive
applications to need to know about
HI views and NS views and different
things and different frameworks.
So,
we have a general UI element that we use.
And once an assistive app
has hold of this UI element,
it's able to ask it some questions.
Like,
"Give me your list of attributes." "Give
me a value for a particular attribute."
"Is that attribute settable?" And then
it can set a value for an attribute.
And with this small kind
of set of functionality and
this one generic UI element,
we're able to do quite a lot.
So let's focus in on a UI element
and some of its attributes.
So that's the one that that
assistive app got back.
And some very key attributes, types,
are the role.
In this case, it's just a string that
says I'm an application.
And it also has children.
And that children attribute,
when you ask for its value,
will give back an array
of other UI elements.
So we can build an entire
hierarchy fairly easily.
And then that first one, it has a role,
which is - this represents the menu bar
of the application that I'm talking to.
It has a parent, which refers back up to
the application UI element.
And then it has children of its own.
And then this other one, perhaps,
is a window in that application.
Again, the AX role is referring to
kind of the type of UI element,
or the kind of UI element
that you're talking about.
And then the AX role is referring
to the type of UI element,
or the kind of UI element
that you're talking about.
And then the AX role is referring
to kind of the type of UI element,
or the kind of UI element
that you're talking about.
And then the AX role is referring
to kind of the type of UI element,
or the kind of UI element
that you're talking about.
element or the kind of
UI element that this represents.
It has a reference up to its parent,
again the application,
and then an array of children of its own.
So, rather than go through slides,
let's come on way over here.
It's a big stage.
Primany to the demo machine and
let's start our first hands-on.
Okay, how many folks are actually
following hands-on with me?
Okay, good.
Excellent.
So what you will want to do is
in the dicey bunch of stuff,
In the folder,
you'd want to go to stage one.
And first, let's launch the application.
It's labeled Dicey Start.
So Dicey is just a little game,
a little dice game where
we can roll the die,
We get a bunch of items here.
We can click a die to hold that
die so that when we re-roll,
those values are held.
I'm going to try for fives.
No more fives.
Oh, I'm going to go for a full house.
Oh, nothing.
Oh, I got it.
That's excellent.
So your results may vary.
Yes, please.
Yeah, all right.
Full house.
And then this column here is
showing me if I were to choose to
score in this particular category,
I'd get 25 points.
This button kind of locks in that score,
and I'm ready for my next turn.
So feel free to play with
Dicey for just a second or two,
and then stop and pay attention.
I didn't realize until too late
that potential pitfall of giving
people a game that I know when
building it I tested way too much.
Oh, I'm doing great.
I'll have to save this for now.
Okay.
I digress.
So, what I'd like you to do next - oh,
one other thing to show you
in Dicey is if you would
open up the Preferences pane.
I had some preferences set.
You'll notice that we have
a game difficulty slider
that goes from difficult,
which means I only get one roll per turn,
normal is three rolls per turn,
and easy is five rolls per turn.
And we'll be accessorizing
this slider a little later.
I'd like you to leave
these two open for now.
Everybody with me?
Screen pretty much look the same?
Show of hands?
Wave them.
Thank you.
Next thing I'd like you to do is
let's go into System Preferences.
And we're going to go to the
Universal Access Preference pane.
And once there,
I want you to make sure that you have
checked "Enable access for assistive
devices." Everybody got that checked?
All right, I'll wait a couple seconds.
Now does everybody have it checked?
Show of hands?
Thank you.
It's hard to see nodding up here.
Great.
So close up system preferences.
That checkbox is what allows assistive
applications to communicate with
other applications on the system.
And then the last thing we'll do
here is I'd like you to navigate to
slash developer.
Actually, I'll go into column view.
So developer applications
Utilities, Accessibility Tools,
Accessibility Inspector,
and for our session today I'd like
you to drag that to the dock because
we'll be using that a good deal.
So the path again,
in case you missed it the first time:
/developer/applications/utilities/access
ibilitytools/accessibilityinspector.
Everybody got that in the dock?
Show of hands?
Thank you.
All right.
And with that,
you can close your Finder windows
if they're getting in your way.
Maybe I'll just hide them.
And then launch Accessibility Inspector.
And I'm going to wait for a second
and then bump up the font size here.
All right,
and as I move the mouse around,
Accessibility Inspector is
itself an assistive application.
It's communicating with
other apps on the system.
In fact, if I move it around Dicey,
I notice that I'm getting in the
window a lot of information back.
I'm seeing
the representation of the UI element that
is under the mouse at any given time.
I'm seeing all of its attributes,
so we'll see some familiar
ones up there like roll,
which we saw just a bit ago,
kind of midway down as the parent.
It doesn't have any children of its own,
but many, many more attributes including
where it lives on the screen,
its size and position, its value,
whether it's enabled,
whether it has the focus,
what window it's in,
the top level UI element,
which represents if the thing
happens to be in a sheet or a drawer,
it will report that instead of the window
that the sheet or the drawer belongs to.
And then at the very top,
we can see its hierarchy from that
text element all the way back up the
chain of parents to the application.
What I'd like you to do is please
point anywhere in the blank spot of
the title bar of the the Dicey window,
and let's click on it to
make sure it's in the front.
And then what I'd like you to do is
we're going to freeze the UI - excuse me,
freeze on a particular UI element.
If you look at the small print
at the very bottom of the
Accessibility Inspector window,
it says "Command F7 toggles
UI element lock." On a laptop,
you typically also have
to hold down the Fn key,
so Command Fn and then F7,
and we should lock onto one UI element,
so that as we move the mouse around,
things don't change like
crazy in that text field.
Does everybody have it locked?
Please raise a hand.
Thank you.
Excellent.
So it's red and now we can kind of
take a moment and look around here.
When we locked,
we also did one other thing.
You'll notice that a little
window has popped up.
Let's see if I can zoom in here.
There we go.
And if we take a look,
it shows us a pop-up of all of the
attributes that we see in the bigger
Accessibility Inspector window.
It also allows us to highlight the
item that is currently locked on.
And by doing that, it's shaded in red.
So that way,
if you're not sure where you are,
you can get a visual depiction of
where that element is on the screen
that you're currently looking at.
So feel free to turn that
on and turn it back off.
And then also interesting
in here is the Go To pop-up.
So sometimes attributes are
just values such as the size,
which is just a point.
Or the position, which is just a point.
Sometimes an attribute is a
reference to another UI element.
And this Go To pop-up allows
us to navigate or jump
around to - or excuse me,
navigate is a better word
- to other UI elements.
Now we have a lot of children,
but we are going to
jump up to the parent.
So the Go To AX parent.
And when I release this,
we're going to jump to the application.
All right.
Let me zoom back out.
And so if I take a look
at the application,
you'll notice again it has a role.
The role description is an
attribute that provides a localized,
presentable description of the role.
The title of the application is Dicey.
We notice it has three children.
And it has kind of convenience
attributes for jumping right to the
menu bar and right to its windows
instead of going through its children.
You'll also notice we see
whether we're frontmost or not
and whether we're hidden or not.
And that these attributes
have this W in parentheses.
That indicates that we can set
them or that they're writable.
And we can actually interact
with the application right here
in Accessibility Inspector.
So going back down to
our Locked On panel,
I'd like you to,
in the attributes pop-up, choose Hidden.
And then we're going to
type the new value here.
Accessibility Inspector is
going to expect a 1 for true.
So we'll type a 1.
And then click "Set
Value." Is everybody there?
Show of hands.
Excellent.
So, once we set that value,
now "Hidden" is indeed true.
That application is hidden.
Our Accessibility
Inspector window hasn't refreshed.
We need to click the
Refresh button down here.
And we'll notice that Hidden is now True,
or reports itself as True,
and Frontmost reports itself as False,
because some attributes are interrelated.
Now,
Let's go back to Attributes,
to AX Frontmost,
and we're going to set that to True to
bring our application to the very front.
So Attribute, AX Frontmost in the pop-up.
One for true.
And then we're going to set the
value of AX_FRONTMOST to true.
Is everybody there?
Excellent.
All right.
Let's refresh one more time just to
notice that the values do indeed update.
And now let's navigate down
to the Preferences window.
So using the Go To pop-up,
we'll look at the AX Children,
or we could actually
go to the AX Windows,
your choice, of Dicey,
of the application.
And we want to go to the
AX Window Preferences.
So Go To Preferences.
Everybody there?
Show of hands.
Thanks.
And let's turn on highlighting
now so we make sure that yes,
we are indeed looking at the right thing.
And you'll notice that Window has
a number of things that an
application does not have,
including ways to very
quickly get to the controls,
such as the Close button.
So let's go to the Close button.
So go to AXCloseButton.
And you'll notice that our highlight
updates and our focus updates.
And if we look at the bottom
of all those attributes,
you'll notice that
there's an action listed.
So in addition to having attributes,
a UI element can have actions.
And actions tend to be things
that are best represented as
like a single mouse click,
a single mouse action.
And notice that it's representing
what you're doing to the mouse.
It's not a close action,
it's a press action.
Because every button you can press it,
what actually happens when you press
it isn't part of the definition of
what we're exposing here as the action.
So down in the Locked On area,
you'll notice that we
have a pop-up for actions.
AX Press is our only choice.
And we can click to perform the action,
which should close.
our window.
So let's click perform.
and our window goes away.
All right,
there's going to be one more thing that
we take a look at before we move on.
First, we're in this state where this
thing's red and locked on.
Let's untoggle by doing Command and
then probably on a laptop Fn,
F7 to unlock the UI element.
So now as you move the mouse around,
things change.
If you don't have any dice
showing at the moment,
I'd like you to roll the die.
And we use Accessibility Inspector to,
as you might guess,
inspect the accessibility
of an application.
And one thing we'll notice is, you know,
I point to various text,
and it reports itself as static text.
Or I point at the roll button,
it tells me it's a button and it has an
AX title of "roll." But then I point at
this custom dice view and... nothing.
As far as an accessible - excuse me,
an assistive application is concerned,
there is no dice view
in this application.
And to have a dice game without a dice
view makes this very unaccessible.
Now two other things that we'll
be dealing with are if we point
at one of these arrow buttons,
you'll notice that its title is blank
because it doesn't have a text title.
So a user would have no idea
what this button might do.
I can press it,
but who knows what's going to happen.
And even if I kind of point
at the total down here,
the numeric total, being excited,
I can see that the grand total
is on the same line as this.
But from the standpoint of
the accessibility inspector,
there's no connection between this
number and the label grand total.
So some of the things we'll
be doing in this session,
or the things we'll be doing,
is making it so that those items
that are already reporting some
accessibility information report
more and better information.
And then we will also be making
sure that this invisible view that,
as far as voiceover would be concerned,
it doesn't exist,
we'll make sure that it shows up on the
radar map and reports itself correctly.
Okay, great.
Let's go back to slides.
Let me hide this for a sec.
Okay, so that was an application
where I built the application,
I did no accessibility whatsoever,
and as you saw,
we were able to interact a
good deal with the application,
but there were some key portions
that were completely inaccessible.
So Cocoa is doing a lot of that for you.
Now, a few other things that we
saw in that hands-on is,
in addition to asking about attributes,
We might also be asked about a
list of actions on our side of the
- I'll move over to the Cocoa side
- a description for an action,
to perform an action.
We also saw that moving the mouse around,
there's some way that an
assistive app is finding out
what element is at a given point.
So there must be some hit
testing going on in Cocoa.
And in addition,
one thing we did not see,
but there's also the concept
that an assistive app can get
some notifications that things
have changed in the application.
So that's what's going on.
How is Cocoa doing that automatically?
And what is it on the
Cocoa side that's the backend,
kind of the thing that that
UI element is referring to?
[Transcript missing]
So we also need to do hit
testing and focus testing.
So hit testing,
we get past a point and we return the
element that corresponds to that point,
and also what element in the
application has the focus.
So far, nine methods.
There's a tenth method,
and it also explains why our Dice
View just didn't show up by default.
Accessibility is ignored.
The view hierarchy is more
complicated than even as a user
looking at an application with
a window and a button in it.
You can't necessarily even
see that that window has a
frame view with a content view,
and then there's an NSButton,
and then in that is an NSButton cell.
You just see a window and a button.
So similarly,
we don't want to force an accessibility
or an assistive application to
deal with that complexity either.
So we only report the
window having a button.
Everything in between
It's part of the view hierarchy,
but it reports accessibility is ignored,
yes.
In fact, that is the default for a view,
or NSView.
Accessibility is ignored, yes,
I am ignored.
Now, on the other hand,
sometimes we need to provide more
detail to an assistive application than
actually exists in our object model.
So, for instance, a scroller
It's a scroller.
However, if you inspect a scroller in...
Accessibility Inspector,
you'll notice that it has children.
It has four buttons
and a value indicator.
Now, where did these come from?
Well, in fact, they're not cells,
they're not controls,
they're actually just fictional objects,
they're not fictional,
they're real objects,
but they're objects that we make
up expressly for the purpose of
responding to the 10 methods of
the accessibility protocol so
that they can present themselves
as buttons and value indicators.
In our case,
we have custom sub-elements where
each die is a separate class.
It knows how to draw itself.
It handles a little bit of dealing with
drawing the focus and what have you.
But it's not an NS cell.
It's not an NS view.
It's just something that kind
of does a little drawing for me.
So, we are going to implement the ten
methods of the Accessibility protocol.
And we're going to accessorize
these as check boxes,
because that's kind of the closest
role to the standard roles.
Because we can hold them or unhold them.
We can kind of turn them on or
off as to kind of a checked state.
And so let's do hands-on part two,
where we'll take a look at
exposing some of the built-in
[Transcript missing]
So first, just a very quick look at it,
at the project itself.
We have an application controller.
We have a custom view class,
which is doing the
drawing of the dice view.
And then within it, a die class,
which is responsible for
drawing and dealing with the
randomization of each die.
The game is kind of the back end logic.
And then I've added--
A category on DC Dice View in
the dcdiceviewaccessibility.m.
So if you select that, take a look.
So, the first thing we're going
to do is just see what happens
if we change the default.
Instead of saying that we are ignored,
let's uncomment the method
"Accessibility is ignored"
And recompile and launch.
So build and go.
Is everybody there?
Show of hands.
Who's catching up?
Okay,
I'll leave that running and I'll repeat.
Step 2, DC Dice View, Accessibility.
It's a category where we're going
to put our accessibility stuff,
and we're overriding accessibility
is ignored to return no.
Everybody got it running?
Show of hands.
Excellent.
And once it's running,
I'd like you to launch Accessibility
Inspector if you had quit it.
And you'll notice that now,
at the very least,
we're not completely off the map.
Something is here.
It doesn't know what our role is,
but actually it has a decent
amount of information.
The size and position is there,
it knows what window we're in,
it knows who our parent is.
So we are picking up the accessibility
that NSView implements by default,
simply by saying we're not ignored.
Okay,
but let's actually go in and at least
get our role correct at the moment.
So we'll quit Dicey.
I'll hide the Accessibility Inspector.
And back in the code, we're going to...
Return something different
for the role attribute.
So if I uncomment this second method,
which is Accessibility Attribute Value,
Simply, if the thing that they're asking
for is the role attribute,
and again, those constants are all
defined in NSAccessibility.h,
then instead of returning the default,
we're going to say we're a group,
because we're grouping
a bunch of sub-elements.
There's no real interaction I can
do with the green area itself.
And that role is also
defined in NSAccessibility.h.
However, if they ask for anything else,
I'm just going to do what my
superclass has implemented.
So let's build and run again.
And bring up the Accessibility Inspector.
How many folks are there
or very close to there?
Okay, great.
I'll hold up for just a sec.
But what you'll see is that our role
is indeed now reported as AX Group,
but also the role description has
automatically updated for Group.
Our superclass implements the
functionality to return the
proper role description for
whatever role we happen to have,
so we did not have to
implement that ourselves.
Now, we're still not all
the way there because,
okay, we know there's something here,
but these dice are still invisible as
far as an assistive app is concerned.
But we will get to that all in good time.
All right, so that's it for this step.
Let's jump back to the slides.
[Transcript missing]
It's pretty easy to take a custom
view and at least get it on the map,
and that there are a lot of attributes
that automatically show up for us.
And we've also seen that things
like buttons and text fields
and the like already have all
the accessibility you need,
except perhaps for a piece
or two here and there.
So let's talk about
customizing some instances.
So we saw that we had those
image buttons that we had no idea
what would happen if we pressed
them because they had no title.
We saw numbers that were just floating
in space and we had no idea that it
was the grand total because there
was no accessibility information as
to what title it happened to have.
And to customize instances,
try to make it as easy as possible.
You don't need to subclass,
you just override a few attributes.
And you can do it
programmatically using the method.
So you can set the accessibility,
set override value for attribute,
and you can also set many of
these up using interface builder.
And in fact,
we're going to do both in just a moment.
But first,
let me tell you about a few of these
common attributes that you definitely
want to add to your application.
So the first is the
description attribute.
This is especially handy on buttons.
You could put it on a group if
you had a number of groups as to
describing what this was grouping.
Some rules of thumb:
it's just a simple string.
It should be a localized string.
Don't put the role name in the string.
Don't call it the "add button."
Just call it "add" as the description.
Most assistive applications,
such as VoiceOver, are going to tack the
role on the end anyway,
and it'll say "add button button,"
and that just sounds dumb.
It often is the same thing that
if you had a text title in there,
that's what you would have written,
but use lowercase.
And it's not the role description,
which is saying, "Okay, I'm a button,
I'm a window." This is more specific
to the instance of the item.
Now, Spotlight Help uses the
description as it's kind of
figuring out where it's going,
or as it's indexing your UI.
Spotlight Help also uses
these title indicators.
So this is a reference from
one UI element to another,
because sometimes the title isn't
embedded in the same control.
So in this case,
we have a few examples here.
The title UI element attribute
is essentially saying,
I am pointing to the
UI element that holds my title.
So, the text field that says 2-42
would have that property and on
the other end or the value of that
property would be the grand total.
Or the text field, the blank one,
would have the title UI element
attribute and its value would
be that name text field.
And you can also set up a back pointer
where a particular UI element can say,
I serve as the title for all
of these other UI elements.
And that can be an array of UI elements.
So it might be that, well,
grand total doesn't really work,
but it might be one where
there are more than one things
that this thing refers to.
This also is used by Safari help.
Links.
So once in a while when
you're going through Mac OS X,
you'll see an interface where
there's a bunch of stuff on the left,
and you click on the thing on the left,
and the thing in the middle
changes to reflect the thing
you selected on the left.
But there's no good way in
accessibility by default to know that
this thing that I selected on the
left is related to all these other
things that just happened over here.
To do that,
you want to set up linked UI elements.
And it's an array of UI elements
that are related to or linked
to that current UI element.
Then finally, labels.
Again,
there's a lot of information that looking
at a user interface you can discern.
I know that that last thing
is where difficult is,
and that one on this
end is where easy is.
But that information
doesn't automatically show
up for an assistive app.
And so we need to give it
a little more information.
So for a slider, for instance,
you would want to give that slider
a label UI elements attribute,
which is an array that contains the
UI elements for those three labels.
We need some way for that assistive
app to know that difficult
means one and easy means five.
And so each of those labels
needs to have a value attribute.
So that, okay, I've picked this one
and the value is five,
so therefore that slider
should be set to five.
And we're going to hook
one of these up as well.
So, let's get to it.
All right, we're on stage three now.
And we're going to do this
entirely in Interface Builder.
Well, we'll go into Xcode first.
So launch the project
for Dicey stage three.
And then on the left-hand side,
down in Resources, is the main menu .nib.
I'd like you to double-click
to launch Interface Builder.
And I'm going to hide others.
Does everybody have the main menu open?
Show of hands.
How many folks need another minute?
Or close?
Okay.
Alrighty.
So, first let's do the button.
Select the first button
with the arrow on it.
Go to Tools, Show Inspector.
And in the Inspector,
we're going to go to
the Accessibility pane.
It's also Command 6.
To add a description, we just type it in.
We're just going to call it "select".
And then we're also going to indicate
that this button has a title,
which is "ones" or that text field
that reads "ones". So for this,
this is very similar to hooking
up an outlet in Interface Builder.
We control drag from
the button to "ones".
And then in the Inspector,
we select AXTitleUIElement
and click Connect.
And then for a little practice,
we just Ctrl+do the same for the
two text fields on either side.
Ctrl+click from the
text field to its title,
select AX_Title_UI_Element, and connect.
And third time,
Control-drag to the title, select title.
You can also double-click here.
But we'll hit Connect, hook those up.
We'll save our changes.
Head back to Xcode and Build and Run.
So, we'll roll the die,
take a look in the
Accessibility Inspector,
first at that button,
and you'll notice that
Indeed, towards the bottom there,
the AX description is in place.
It's reporting itself.
It is select.
And in fact,
it also has a title UI element,
which is an AX static text.
Let's freeze for just a moment.
So again,
Command-Fn-F7 to freeze on that button.
Oops, lost it.
And let's turn highlighting on so we
can see that that button is highlighted.
And then go to its title UI element.
And you'll notice it jumps over
that it does indeed refer to ones.
So now we have a good deal more
information about what this
button could possibly be for.
And then let's unlock and quit.
You can leave the
Accessibility Inspector open.
Let's close this project
and go on to step four.
So let's close that nib file as well.
So step four,
we're going to accessorize the slider.
Does everyone have Step 4 open?
And in Step 4,
let's take a brief look at the Nib file.
And in the Nib file,
the main menu Nib in step 4,
if we select the app controller,
And then look at the connections.
I've added a few connections
for the sake of time.
I've added an outlet, I should say,
to the slider in our Preferences
pane and to each of the labels:
Difficult, Easy, and Normal.
So we can close Interface Builder.
And in the AppController class,
back in Xcode, dcappcontroller.h,
in the header,
let's uncomment these IB outlets.
And then head over to the .m file
to the first commented-out method,
SetupSliderAccessibility.
And if we comment that out...
Just take a look at the code.
What we're doing is overriding
some attributes via code.
So the first thing we do is we just grab
the min and the max value of the slider.
In the first section,
we're setting up that array of labels.
Now, one thing that's important to note
is that it is the cell of a control
that is typically accessorized,
not the control itself.
Because when we move that
cell into things like a
matrix or into a table view,
we want that functionality of
access - that accessibility
functionality to travel with the cell,
not the outer control.
So, even though we have an
outlet to the actual control,
we want to be using the cells within
those controls as the elements that
we're setting as the UI elements.
So we make an array of the
cells of those three labels,
and then using accessibility set
override value for attribute,
we take the cell of the slider,
and we set that array for the attribute,
and its accessibility to the control.
label UI elements attribute.
And then for each of those labels,
we need to provide a value.
And so all we're doing here is
again setting an override value.
The value itself,
for the difficult label,
it's the min value.
For the normal label,
we just take the middle
value by calculating it.
And then for the easy label,
we just take the max value of the slider,
and we set each of these on
the appropriate label for
NS Accessibility label value attribute.
And then finally,
let's uncomment and awake
from Nib calling this method.
And let's build and run.
And now if we bring up our Preferences
and Accessibility Inspector,
If we point to the slider itself,
you'll notice that kind of midway
down it has AX label UI elements,
an array size of 3.
And if we point to any of our labels,
it now has an AX label value.
This one's 5, 3, and 1.
Is everybody there?
Show of hands.
Excellent.
All right,
and that's it for this particular phase,
so we can quit out of all that.
And back to the slides.
So it's really easy to
customize instances.
Adding descriptions,
dragging up this thing as the label
for this other thing in Interface
Builder is extraordinarily easy.
We had a lot of buttons
that we didn't go through.
It can be a bit time consuming,
but not very difficult.
And even if we need to do it in code,
we just need to get access to them
and set a few values here and there.
So it should be very simple to improve
the accessibility of your applications.
So definitely encourage that.
But we still have one glaring hole
in our accessibility story for Dicey,
and that's the fact that
I still have no dice.
Which is kind of tough in a dice game.
So what's the last bit
that we need to do here?
So we already saw that the view
is reporting itself as a group,
but it doesn't think
that it has any children.
So we're going to have to
implement the children attribute
to return a bunch of dice.
We're going to have to hit test them
so that when the mouse is over them,
we say, "Oh, this is the guy you're
looking for." Focus testing,
because dicey, in fact,
if I have full keyboard
navigation turned on,
I can tab through all of the dice.
I can hit the space bar
to toggle the hold on it.
So that's all I need
to do on the dice view,
but the DC die class is
just a subclass of NSObject.
So it doesn't implement
any accessibility methods.
So we're going to walk
through the implementation
of all ten of those methods.
And then there's one or two places where
we need to let an assistive app know
that something has changed and ensure
that some proper notifications are sent.
So let's take a look at those.
So we're in stage five.
[Transcript missing]
Okay.
First,
let's look at DC Dice View Accessibility.
And we'll look at
Accessibility Attribute Value.
So we already dealt
with the role earlier,
but now we need to do something to
return the fact that we have children.
So, if the attribute that came
in is the children attribute,
[Transcript missing]
So, Accessibility Hit Test.
We need to do hit testing.
Now, by default,
we saw it was working fine.
We mouse in, it shows up.
Okay, our hit testing works.
We know that we have the mouse over us.
But if something below us
needs to report that it is the
item that is under the mouse,
we need to pass the message along.
So here, if we're not cleared,
we'll just find the point,
We'll find the die that goes to
that point and we'll pass the
message down that it needs to
do an accessibility hit test.
Now, when a point comes in,
it is always in screen coordinates.
So, first we need to convert from the
screen to the window that we're in.
So, convert screen to base in our window.
And then we need to convert
from the window down to
our local view coordinates.
So that's what we're
doing in the second line.
And again, this is Tiger,
so I'm not using a fancy
Objective-C enumeration.
But we can fix that for Leopard.
Alright, now for focused UI element.
In this case,
the DC Dice View is keeping track
of which die is the first responder.
It holds the focus,
but then its sub-elements kind of move
along and have the keyboard focus.
If--
We are the first responder.
Then we know which of our
sub-dice is the first responder,
and so we can pass along the message
to it to return the focused UI element.
Now, if you get the message "focused
UI element," that means the
application knows that the
focus is at least within you.
It might be something beneath you,
but it's at least in your
purview or one of your children.
Similarly, with the hit testing,
if you get that message,
you know the mouse is within you or
one of your children or their children.
Okay, let's move over to DC Die.
And here we need to implement all 10
methods of the Accessibility Protocol.
But most of them are relatively short.
So one of them you knock out
is accessibility is ignored.
You say, no, I'm not ignored.
Accessibility Attribute Names.
This is simply an array
of strings that we return.
We make it static so we don't have to
keep making it and getting rid of it.
Now, we had decided that
the best role for this,
of the existing roles,
was to accessorize this as a checkbox.
Now, sometimes it's not so much
the code that's the challenge
when you're accessorizing,
it's figuring out how
should I expose this object.
And in this case,
because it works like a button in that
I can press it and have it change,
but it also has this state
of being held and unheld,
we decided to accessorize
it as a checkbox.
So where did I get this
list of attributes?
I just went to, I think,
TextEdit Preferences,
turned on Accessibility Inspector,
moused over an existing checkbox,
and just jotted down what list of things
a checkbox returns so that I could
accessorize myself like a checkbox.
This is simply a bunch of names
of what we're going to return.
So that's method two.
We'll skip this one,
it's a utility method.
For the biggie in our whole thing
here is Accessibility Attribute Value.
This tends to be the biggest
method when you're accessorizing.
It's where you give back
all the information.
So, let's take these one by one.
First of all,
we're saying we're a checkbox,
so if they ask us our role,
we'll say we're a checkbox.
Not so bad.
Otherwise,
if they ask for the role description,
there's another one of those
handy convenience functions
in NSAccessibility.h that
we can hand in a role,
and we can get back the system's
role description localized correctly.
so again,
not so hard for us to do that either.
If they ask for our parent,
we are keeping track of our
parent so we can return it.
Screen geometry - so our
position and our size.
So, again, we know our bounds.
It's a property of the die.
It knows its bounds.
So for the position we
get our local point,
there's a bug in the is flipped code,
which I discovered after
I posted it to the WWC site,
but we can correct that as a little
exercise on all of our parts.
The local point we convert
to the window point,
and then from there to the screen,
and we return our position.
And then for the size,
we know our bounds, we can grab our size,
we convert it up to the window.
And since really the window
and the screen have the same
transform with regards to scale,
we don't need to transform to the size
because it's going to remain the same.
We can return the size.
It's important to note that we're
dealing with an NSValue object that's
wrapping the point and wrapping the size.
All right, let's jump up.
We need to know our window,
but we know our parent already
knows what window we're in,
so we'll just return whatever
our parent says is correct.
And the same is true of
our top-level UI element.
Now for our value,
"has hold" is representing
whether we're held or not.
That's our - we're saying
that's our checked state,
that's our value.
So if we have a hold, we'll return a 1,
an NSNumber, otherwise it'll be a 0.
We can't be disabled,
so if they ask if we're enabled,
the answer is yes.
We are maintaining our own Boolean
as to whether we are focused so
we know whether to display our own
focus ring when we draw ourselves.
So if we're asked if we have the focus,
we can respond correctly.
We have no help,
but we do have a description.
And there's a little bit of logic here,
because we wanted to tell how
many spots we were showing.
So I factored that out
into another method.
And the key thing here is we're
figuring out how many spots we have.
We mentioned that word "die." But also
that these are localized strings,
because you want your
description to be localized.
Okay, that's three down.
Seven to go.
So, are we settable?
The only thing that can happen is
we'll allow somebody to set our focus.
So, if they say, "Are you focused?
Is that settable?" We'll return,
"Yes." Otherwise, "No."
Since there is one attribute
where we can be set,
if that's what they're trying to set,
and they're trying to set focus to true,
there's a method in our parent where
we can set ourselves as the focus die.
It's important to note
that it's impossible to set
something to be unfocused.
It's yes or nothing.
Actions.
Since we are a checkbox,
a checkbox has a press action.
So we'll return an array
with one object when somebody
asks us for our action names.
Again, we have an action description
and a convenience function so
that we can get the appropriate
description for a given action.
And then if we're asked
to perform an action,
we do the appropriate
action in the application.
[Transcript missing]
If we get the hit test method,
we know we are the thing
that the mouse hits.
It's within us or one of our children.
Well, we don't have any children,
so we would just return self.
However, what if somebody subclassed our
die and decided that the die each
spot was going to be accessible?
For whatever reason.
Well, and maybe some of them had
children and they were ignored.
We would want to make sure that
when this was called by a subclass,
that we actually returned
an unignored ancestor.
And so in that case,
we would wrap it in this to make
ourselves a little safer and return self.
The same is true, there's nothing,
there's no more granular focus than us.
So therefore, we return self,
or kind of that wrapped self,
as the focused UI element.
Okay.
Bye.
[Transcript missing]
Roll the die.
And voila, we now have dice.
And now your homework is to
go play that in VoiceOver.
Because it should work.
Alright, if we're done,
if we could get back to slides, if not,
that's fine too.
So let's go quickly through.
So the Accessibility
Developer List is accessibility-dev.
We'll have all this information.
We'll have a lab tomorrow at 8 o'clock.
Excuse me, 9 o'clock.
I won't be here at 8 o'clock.
And immediately following
this is the Accessibility and
VoiceOver Feedback session,
which is in Knob Hill.
So please come to the lab
with your applications.
We can talk about accessorizing them.
And please come to the feedback forum.
Just in summary,
more Mac OS X features than
ever in Leopard are relying
on application accessibility.
Now, we could have built Dicey
with standard controls.
I could have just made a group
view that drew a background and put
some buttons in there for the dice.
That would have made my
life a little bit easier.
But it would have made a bad example
of how to accessorize from scratch.
So if you are ever on the fence of, well,
maybe I should just do my
own or use the standard one,
have accessibility stick in
your mind as a reason to veer
towards the standard one,
because you get a lot more functionality.
Or you could have, say,
for zero work or maybe just a
little bit of tweaking work.
Keep away from mouse-only operations
when you're designing your apps.
Adding those attributes like
descriptions and title UI elements
- you think it's very small
because it's not a lot of work,
but it's a tremendous
help in accessorizing.
And if you're doing
custom views and controls,
make them accessible.
If you're subclass or
tremendous viewer control,
use the superclass,
don't reinvent everything.
But then in sub-elements,
the 10 methods are terribly bad at all.